The work, the first volume of which I now submit to the public, forms the continuation of my 
Zur 
Kritik  der  Politi
schen  Oekonomie
  (
A  Contribution  to  the  Criticism  of  Political  Economy
) 
published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and the continuation is due to an illness 
of many years’ duration that again and again interrupted my work. 
The substance of th
at earlier work is summarised in the first three chapters of this volume. This is 
done  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  connexion  and  completeness.  The  presentation  of  the  subject  
matter is improved. As far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only hi
nted at in the 
earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst, conversely, points worked out fully there are 
only  touched  upon  in  this  volume.  The  sections  on  the  history  of  the  theories  of  value  and  of  
money are now, of course, left out altogether. T
he reader of the earlier work will find, however, 
in  the  notes  to  the  first  chapter  additional  sources  of  reference  relative  to  the  history  of  those  
theories. 
Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the first chapter, especially
 the 
section  that  contains  the  analysis  of  commodities,  will,  therefore,  present  the  greatest  difficulty.  
That which concerns more especially the analysis of the substance of value and the magnitude of 
value,  I  have,  as  much  as  it  was  possible,  popularised
.
1
  The  value
-form,  whose  fully  developed  
shape  is  the  money
-form,  is  very  elementary  and  simple.  Nevertheless,  the  human  mind  has  for  
more than 2,000 years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it all, whilst on the other hand, to the 
successful  analysis  
of  much  more  composite  and  complex  forms,  there  has  been  at  least  an  
approximation. Why? Because the body, as an organic whole, is more easy of study than are the 
cells  of  that  body.  In  the  analysis  of  economic  forms,  moreover,  neither  microscopes  nor  
chem
ical reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both. But in bourgeois society, 
the commodity-
form of the product of labour – or value
-form of the commodity – 
is the economic 
cell
-form. To the superficial observer, the analysis of these for
ms seems to turn upon minutiae. It 
does in fact deal with minutiae, but they are of the same order as those dealt with in microscopic 
anatomy. 
With the exception of the section o
n   value
-form, therefore, this volume cannot stand accused on 
the  score  of  dif
ficulty.  I  presuppose,  of  course,  a  reader  who  is  willing  to  learn  something  new  
and therefore to think for himself.  
The  physicist  either  observes  physical  phenomena  where  they  occur  in  their  most  typical  form  
and  most  free  from  disturbing  influence,  or,  wherever  possible,  he  makes  experiments  under  
conditions that assure the occurrence of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have to 
examine  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  and  the  conditions  of  production  and  exchange  
corresponding  to  that  mode.  Up  to  the  present  time,  their  classic  ground  is  England.  That  is  the  
reason why England is used as the chief illustration in the development of my theoretical ideas. If, 
however,  the  German  reader  shrugs  his  shoulders  at  the  condition  of  the  English  industrial  and  
agricultural  labourers,  or  in  optimist  fashion  comforts  himself  with  the  thought  that  in  Germany  
things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, “
De te fabula narratur!
” [It is of you that the 
story is told. – Horace]
Intrinsically,  it 
is  not  a  question  of  the  higher  or  lower  degree  of  development  of  the  social  
antagonisms  that  result  from  the  natural  laws  of  capitalist  production.  It  is  a  question  of  these  
laws themselves, of these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevita
ble results. The 
7 
Preface to the First German Edition (Marx 1867)
country  that  is  more  developed  industrially  only  shows,  to  the  less  developed,  the  image  of  its  
own future. 
But  apart  from  this.  Where  capitalist  production  is  fully  naturalised  among  the  Germans  (for  
instance, in the factories proper) th
e condition of things is much worse than in England, because 
the  counterpoise  of  the  Factory  Acts  is  wanting.  In  all  other  spheres,  we,  like  all  the  rest  of  
Continental  Western  Europe,  suffer  not  only  from  the  development  of  capitalist  production,  but  
also
 from the incompleteness of that development. Alongside the modern evils, a whole series of 
inherited  evils  oppress  us,  arising  from  the  passive  survival  of  antiquated  modes  of  production,  
with  their  inevitable  train  of  social  and  political  anachronisms.  We  suffer  not  only  from  the  
living, but from the dead. 
Le mort saisit le vif!
 [The dead holds the living in his grasp. 
– formula 
of French common law]
The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western Europe are, in comparison 
with those
 of England, wretchedly compiled. But they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a 
glimpse of the Medusa head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of things at home, if, as 
in England, our governments and parliaments appointed periodically commissions of inquiry into 
economic  conditions;  if  these  commissions  were  armed  with  the  same  plenary  powers  to  get  at  
the  truth;  if  it  was  possible  to  find  for  this  purpose  men  as  competent,  as  free  from  partisanship  
and  respect  of  persons  as  are  the  Engli
sh  factory
-inspectors,  her  medical  reporters  on  public  
health,  her  commissioners  of  inquiry  into  the  exploitation  of  women  and  children,  into  housing  
and food. Perseus wore a magic cap down over his eyes and ears as a make
-believe that there are 
no monster
s.    
Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the American war of independence 
sounded the tocsin for the European middle class, so that in the 19th century, the American Civil 
War sounded it for the European working class. In England t
he process of social disintegration is 
palpable. When it has reached a certain point, it must react on the Continent. There it will take a 
form more brutal or more humane, according to the degree of development of the working class 
itself.  Apart  from  highe
r  motives,  therefore,  their  own  most  important  interests  dictate  to  the  
classes that are for the nonce the ruling ones, the removal of all legally removable hindrances to 
the free development of the working class. For this reason, as well as others, I have
 given so large 
a  space  in  this  volume  to  the  history,  the  details,  and  the  results  of  English  factory  legislation.  
One  nation  can  and  should  learn  from  others.  And  even  when  a  society  has  got  upon  the  right  
track  for  the  discovery  of  the  natural  laws  of  i
ts  movement  – 
and  it  is  the  ultimate  aim  of  this  
work,  to  lay  bare  the  economic  law  of  motion  of  modern  society  – 
it  can  neither  clear  by  bold  
leaps,  nor  remove  by  legal  enactments,  the  obstacles  offered  by  the  successive  phases  of  its  
normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-
pangs.  
To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the capitalist and the landlord in no sense 
couleur de rose
[i.e., seen through rose
-tinted glasses]
. But here individuals are dealt with only in 
so  far  a
s  they  are  the  personifications  of  economic  categories,  embodiments  of  particular  class-
relations and class-
interests. My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic formation 
of society is viewed as a process of natural history, can less than any
  other  make  the  individual  
responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains, however much he may subjectively 
raise himself above them.  
In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry meets not merely the same enemies as 
in all oth
er domains. The peculiar nature of the materials it deals with, summons as foes into the 
field  of  battle  the  most  violent,  mean  and  malignant  passions  of  the  human  breast,  the  Furies  of  
private interest. The English Established Church, e.g., will more read
ily pardon an attack on 38 of 
its  39  articles  than  on  1/39  of  its  income.  Now
-a-days  atheism  is  
culpa  levis
  [a relatively slight 
8 
Preface to the First German Edition (Marx 1867)
sin, c.f. mortal sin]
, as compared with criticism of existing property relations. Nevertheless, there 
is  an  unmistakable  advanc
e.  I  refer,  e.g.,  to  the  Blue  book  published  within  the  last  few  weeks:  
“Correspondence  with  Her  Majesty’s  Missions  Abroad,  regarding  Industrial  Questions  and  
Trades’ Unions.” The representatives of the English Crown in foreign countries there declare in 
so many words that in Germany, in France, to be brief, in all the civilised states of the European 
Continent,  radical  change  in  the  existing  relations  between  capital  and  labour  is  as  evident  and  
inevitable  as  in  England.  At  the  same  time,  on  the  other  side
  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  Mr.  Wade,  
vice
-president of the United States, declared in public meetings that, after the abolition of slavery, 
a  radical  change  of  the  relations  of  capital  and  of  property  in  land  is  next  upon  the  order  of  the  
day. These are signs 
of the times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black cassocks. They do 
not  signify  that  tomorrow  a  miracle  will  happen.  They  show  that,  within  the  ruling  classes  
themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the present society is no solid crystal, but a
n organism 
capable of change, and is constantly changing.  
The second volume of this book will treat of the process of the circulation of capital (Book II.), 
and of the varied forms assumed by capital in the course of its development (Book III.), the third
and last volume (Book IV.), the history of the theory.  
Every  opinion  based  on  scientific  criticism  I  welcome.  As  to  prejudices  of  so-
called  public  
opinion,  to  which  I  have  never  made  concessions,  now  as  aforetime  the  maxim  of  the  great  
Florentine is mine
:  
“Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti.” 
[Follow your own course, and let people talk – paraphrased from Dante]
Karl Marx
London
July 25, 1867
1
  This  is  the  more  necessary,  as  even  the  section  of  Ferdinand  Lassalle’s  work  against  Schulze-
De
litzsch,  in  which  he  professes  to  give  “the  intellectual  quintessence”  of  my  explanations  on  these  
subjects,  contains  important  mistakes.  If  Ferdinand  Lassalle  has  borrowed  almost  literally  from  my  
writings,  and  without  any  acknowledgement,  all  the  general
  theoretical  propositions  in  his  economic  
works,  e.g.,  those  on  the  historical  character  of  capital,  on  the  connexion  between  the  conditions  of  
production  and  the  mode  of  production,  &c.,  &c.,  even  to  the  terminology  created  by  me,  this  may  
perhaps be due 
to purposes of propaganda. I am here, of course, not speaking of his detailed working 
out and application of these propositions, with which I have nothing to do.
Preface to the French Edition (Marx, 1872) 
To the citizen Maurice Lachatre
Dear Citizen,
I  applaud  your  
idea  of  publishing  the  translation  of  “Das  Kapital”  as  a  serial.  In  this  form  the  
book  will  be  more  accessible  to  the  working  class,  a  consideration  which  to  me  outweighs  
everything else.
That  is  the  good  side  of  your  suggestion,  but  here  is  the  reverse  of
  the  medal:  the  method  of  
analysis  which  I  have  employed,  and  which  had  not  previously  been  applied  to  economic  
subjects,  makes  the  reading  of  the  first  chapters  rather  arduous,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  
French public, always impatient to come to a conclusion,  eager  to  know  the  connexion  between  
general  principles  and  the  immediate  questions  that  have  aroused  their  passions,  may  be  
disheartened because they will be unable to move on at once.
That is a disadvantage I am powerless to overcome, unless it
 be  by  forewarning  and  forearming  
those readers who zealously seek the truth. There is no royal road to science, and only those who 
do not dread the fatiguing climb of its steep paths have a chance of gaining its luminous summits. 
Believe me,
dear citizen,
Your devoted,
Karl Marx
London
March 18, 1872
Afterword to the Second German Edition (1873) 
I must start by informing the readers of the first edition about the alterations made in the second 
edition.  One  is  struck  at  once  by  the  clearer  arrangement  of  
the  book.  Additional  notes  are  
everywhere  marked  as  notes  to  the  second  edition.  The  following  are  the  most  important  points  
with regard to the text itself: 
In 
Chapter I, Section 1, the derivation of value from an analysis of the equations by which every 
exchange
-value  is  expressed  has  been  carried  out  with  greater  scientific  strictness;  likewise  the  
connexion  between  the  substance  of  value  and  the  determination  of  the  magnitude  of  value  by  
socially  necessary  labour
-time,  which  was  only  alluded  to  in  the  f
irst  edition,  is  now  expressly  
emphasised. 
Chapter I, Section 3 
(the Form of Value), has been completely revised, a task which 
was made necessary by the double exposition in the first edition, if nothing else. –
 Let me remark, 
in  passing,  that  that  double  exposition  had  been  occasioned  by  my  friend,  Dr.  L  Kugelmann  in  
Hanover.  I  was  visiting  him  in  the  spring  of  1867  when  the  first  proof
-sheets  arrived  from  
Hamburg,  and  he  convinced  me  that  most  readers  needed  a  supplementary,  more  didactic  
explanation  of  t
he  form  of  value.  – 
The  last  section  of  the  first  chapter,  “The  Fetishism  of  
Commodities, etc.,” has largely been altered. Chapter III, Section I (The Measure of Value), has 
been  carefully  revised,  because  in  the  first  edition  this  section  had  been  treated
  negligently,  the  
reader  having  been  referred  to  the  explanation  already  given  in  “Zur  Kritik  der  Politischen  
Oekonomie,” Berlin 1859. Chapter VII, particularly Part 2 [Eng. ed., 
Chapter IX, Section 2
], has 
been re
-written to a great extent. 
It  would  be  a
  waste  of  time  to  go  into  all  the  partial  textual  changes,  which  were  often  purely  
stylistic.  They  occur  throughout  the  book.  Nevertheless  I  find  now,  on  revising  the  French  
translation  appearing  in  Paris,  that  several  parts  of  the  German  original  stand  in
  need  of  rather  
thorough remoulding, other parts require rather heavy stylistic editing, and still others painstaking 
elimination  of  occasional  slips.  But  there  was  no  time  for  that.  For  I  had  been  informed  only  in  
the autumn of 1871, when in the midst of 
other urgent work, that the book was sold out and that 
the printing of the second edition was to begin in January of 1872. 
The appreciation which “Das Kapital” rapidly gained in wide circles of the German working class 
is the best reward of my labours. He
rr Mayer, a Vienna manufacturer, who in economic matters 
represents  the  bourgeois  point  of  view,  in  a  pamphlet  published  during  the  Franco-
German War 
aptly  expounded  the  idea  that  the  great  capacity  for  theory,  which  used  to  be  considered  a  
hereditary   Germ
an   possession,   had   almost   completely   disappeared   amongst   the   so-
called 
educated  classes  in  Germany,  but  that  amongst  its  working  class,  on  the  contrary,  that  capacity  
was celebrating its revival.  
To the present moment Political Economy, in Germany, is a f
oreign science. Gustav von Gulich 
in his “Historical description of Commerce, Industry,” &c., 
1
 especially in the two first volumes 
published  in  1830,  has  examined  at  length  the  historical  circumstances  that  prevented,  in  
Germany,   the   development   of   the   ca
pitalist   mode   of   production,   and   consequently   the   
development,  in  that  country,  of  modern  bourgeois  society.  Thus  the  soil  whence  Political  
Economy springs was wanting. This “science” had to be imported from England and France as a 
ready
-made article; its 
German  professors  remained  schoolboys.  The  theoretical  expression  of  a  
foreign  reality  was  turned,  in  their  hands,  into  a  collection  of  dogmas,  interpreted  by  them  in  
terms  of  the  petty  trading  world  around  them,  and  therefore  misinterpreted.  The  feeling  of 
scientific impotence, a feeling not wholly to be repressed, and the uneasy consciousness of having 
11 
After
word to the Second German Edition (1873)
to touch a subject in reality foreign to them, was but imperfectly concealed, either under a parade 
of literary and historical erudition, or by an admixtur
e of extraneous material, borrowed from the 
so-called  “Kameral”  sciences,  a  medley  of  smatterings,  through  whose  purgatory  the  hopeful  
candidate for the German bureaucracy has to pass. 
Since 1848 capitalist production has developed rapidly in Germany, and at the present time it is in 
the  full  bloom  of  speculation  and  swindling.  But  fate  is  still  unpropitious  to  our  professional  
economists. At the time when they were able to deal with Political Economy in a straightforward 
fashion,  modern  economic  conditions  did  not  actually  exist  in  Germany.  And  as  soon  as  these  
conditions  did  come  into  existence,  they  did  so  under  circumstances  that  no  longer  allowed  of  
their  being  really  and  impartially  investigated  within  the  bounds  of  the  bourgeois  horizon.  In  so  
far  as
  Political  Economy  remains  within  that  horizon,  in  so  far,  i.e.,  as  the  capitalist  regime  is  
looked  upon  as  the  absolutely  final  form  of  social  production,  instead  of  as  a  passing  historical  
phase of its evolution, Political Economy can remain a science on
ly so long as the class struggle 
is latent or manifests itself only in isolated and sporadic phenomena. 
Let us take England. Its Political Economy belongs to the period in which the class struggle was 
as  yet  undeveloped.  Its  last  great  representative,  Ricardo,  in  the  end,  consciously  makes  the  
antagonism  of  class  interests,  of  wages  and  profits,  of  profits  and  rent,  the  starting  point  of  his  
investigations,  naively  taking  this  antagonism  for  a  social  law  of  Nature.  But  by  this  start  the  
science of bourgeoi
s economy had reached the limits beyond which it could not pass. Already in 
the  lifetime  of  Ricardo,  and  in  opposition  to  him,  it  was  met  by  criticism,  in  the  person  of  
Sismondi. 
2
The  succeeding  period,  from  1820  to  1830,  was  notable  in  England  for  scient
ific  activity  in  the  
domain  of  Political  Economy.  It  was  the  time  as  well  of  the  vulgarising  and  extending  of  
Ricardo’s theory, as of the contest of that theory with the old school. Splendid tournaments were 
held. What was done then, is little known to the
 Continent generally, because the polemic is for 
the  most  part  scattered  through  articles  in  reviews,  occasional  literature  and  pamphlets.  The  
unprejudiced  character  of  this  polemic  – 
although  the  theory  of  Ricardo  already  serves,  in  
exceptional  cases,  as  
a  weapon  of  attack  upon  bourgeois  economy  – 
is  explained  by  the  
circumstances of the time. On the one hand, modern industry itself was only just emerging from 
the age of childhood, as is shown by the fact that with the crisis of 1825 it for the first time opens 
the  periodic  cycle  of  its  modern  life.  On  the  other  hand,  the  class  struggle  between  capital  and  
labour is forced into the background, politically by the discord between the governments and the 
feudal  aristocracy  gathered  around  the  Holy  Alliance  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  popular  masses,  
led  by  the  bourgeoisie,  on  the  other;  economically  by  the  quarrel  between  industrial  capital  and  
aristocratic  landed  property  
-  a  quarrel  that  in  France  was  concealed  by  the  opposition  between  
small and large landed pr
operty, and that in England broke out openly after the Corn Laws. The 
literature  of  Political  Economy  in  England  at  this  time  calls  to  mind  the  stormy  forward  
movement in France after Dr. Quesnay’s death, but only as a Saint Martin’s summer reminds us 
of s
pring. With the year 1830 came the decisive crisis.  
In  France  and  in  England  the  bourgeoisie  had  conquered  political  power.  Thenceforth,  the  class  
struggle,  practically  as  well  as  theoretically,  took  on  more  and  more  outspoken  and  threatening  
forms.  It  sounded  the  knell  of  scientific  bourgeois  economy.  It  was  thenceforth  no  longer  a  
question,  whether  this  theorem  or  that  was  true,  but  whether  it  was  useful  to  capital  or  harmful,  
expedient  or  inexpedient,  politically  dangerous  or  not.  In  place  of  disinteres
ted  inquirers,  there  
were hired prize fighters; in place of genuine scientific research, the bad conscience and the evil 
intent  of  apologetic.  Still,  even  the  obtrusive  pamphlets  with  which  the  Anti
-Corn  Law  League,  
led  by  the  manufacturers  Cobden  and  Brig
ht,  deluged  the  world,  have  a  historic  interest,  if  no  
12 
After
word to the Second German Edition (1873)
scientific one, on account of their polemic against the landed aristocracy. But since then the Free 
Trade  legislation,  inaugurated  by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  has  deprived  vulgar  economy  of  this  its  last  
sting
. 
The  Continental  revolution  of  1848-
9  also  had  its  reaction  in  England.  Men  who  still  claimed  
some scientific standing and aspired to be something more than mere sophists and sycophants of 
the ruling classes tried to harmonise the Political Economy of cap
ital with the claims, no longer to 
be  ignored,  of  the  proletariat.  Hence  a  shallow  syncretism  of  which  John  Stuart  Mill  is  the  best  
representative.  It  is  a  declaration  of  bankruptcy  by  bourgeois  economy,  an  event  on  which  the  
great Russian scholar and crit
ic, N. Tschernyschewsky, has thrown the light of a master mind in 
his “Outlines of Political Economy according to Mill.”  
In  Germany,  therefore,  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  came  to  a  head,  after  its  antagonistic  
character  had  already,  in  France  and  E
ngland,  shown  itself  in  a  fierce  strife  of  classes.  And  
meanwhile, moreover, the German proletariat had attained a much more clear class-
consciousness 
than  the  German  bourgeoisie.  Thus,  at  the  very  moment  when  a  bourgeois  science  of  Political  
Economy seeme
d at last possible in Germany, it had in reality again become impossible. 
Under  these  circumstances  its  professors  fell  into  two  groups.  The  one  set,  prudent,  practical  
business  folk,  flocked  to  the  banner  of  Bastiat,  the  most  superficial  and  therefore  th
e  most  
adequate representative of the apologetic of vulgar economy; the other, proud of the professorial 
dignity of their science, followed John Stuart Mill in his attempt to reconcile irreconcilables. Just 
as  in  the  classical  time  of  bourgeois  economy,  so
  also  in  the  time  of  its  decline,  the  Germans  
remained mere schoolboys, imitators and followers, petty retailers and hawkers in the service of 
the great foreign wholesale concern. 
The  peculiar  historical  development  of  German  society  therefore  forbids,  in 
that  country,  all  
original  work  in  bourgeois  economy;  but  not  the  criticism  of  that  economy.  So  far  as  such  
criticism  represents  a  class,  it  can  only  represent  the  class  whose  vocation  in  history  is  the  
overthrow  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  and  t
he  final  abolition  of  all  classes  – 
the 
proletariat. 
The  learned  and  unlearned  spokesmen  of  the  German  bourgeoisie  tried  at  first  to  kill  “Das  
Kapital” by silence, as they had managed to do with my earlier writings. As soon as they found 
that these tactic
s no longer fitted in with the conditions of the time, they wrote, under pretence of 
criticising my book, prescriptions “for the tranquillisation of the bourgeois mind.” But they found 
in  the  workers’  press  – 
see,  e.g.,  Joseph  Dietzgen’s  articles  in  the    – 
antagonists  stronger  than  
themselves, to whom (down to this very day) they owe a reply. 
3
An excellent Russian translation of “Das Kapital” appeared in the spring of 1872. The edition of 
3,000  copies  is  already  nearly  exhausted.  As  early  as  1871,  N.  Siebe
r,  Professor  of  Political  
Economy  in  the  University  of  Kiev,  in  his  work  “David  Ricardo’s  Theory  of  Value  and  of  
Capital,”  referred  to  my  theory  of  value,  of  money  and  of  capital,  as  in  its  fundamentals  a  
necessary  sequel  to  the  teaching  of  Smith  and  Ricar
do.  That  which  astonishes  the  Western  
European  in  the  reading  of  this  excellent  work,  is  the  author’s  consistent  and  firm  grasp  of  the  
purely theoretical position.   
That  the  method  employed  in  “Das  Kapital”  has  been  little  understood,  is  shown  by  the  vari
ous 
conceptions, contradictory one to another, that have been formed of it. 
Thus  the  
Paris  Revue  Positiviste
reproaches  me  in  that,  on  the  one  hand,  I  treat  economics  
metaphysically, and on the other hand – imagine! 
–   confine myself to the mere critical a
nalysis of 
actual  facts,  instead  of  writing  receipts
4
  (Comtist  ones?)  for  the  cook
-shops  of  the  future.  In  
answer to the reproach in re metaphysics, Professor Sieber has it